---
layout: post
title:      "Tool Man       "
date:       2018-01-21 16:47:49 +0000
permalink:  tool_man
---

I have always been fascinated by tools. When I was a toddler my family gave me the affectionate nickname *Tool Man* because of my inclination. It started early when, as I'm told, I would follow my Dad as he did odd jobs around the house. At some point to keep me occupied and out of the way while he worked, he set me up with a hammer and a block of wood with some nails in it. My aunt followed this up by giving me a real wood saw for my 2nd birthday (they have good judgment for the most part I swear). My favorite book from that time period was a picture encyclopedia, and my favorite section by far was the, you guessed it, tool section. Theres a home video of me flipping though it and rattling off, “wrench, hammer, drill press…” and surprising the adults in the room with the more esoteric, “… [jaws of life](http://i.ebayimg.com/00/s/NTY3WDg0Nw==/z/fq0AAOSwf-VWXaOW/$_32.JPG?set_id=880000500F), [pike pole](https://www.duosafety.com/products/pike-poles/).” 

My interest in tools broadened and deepened as I grew up. I escaped my early interest in hammers and nails with my eyesight and soon (maybe with a dawning parental realization that a 2 year old’s primary playthings shouldn’t be so sharp) I graduated to legos, k'nex, and hot wheels tracks. As a kid I spent countless hours constructing lego cities and hot wheel highways of my own design. I can still remember the excitement of getting into a new project - the outside world fading as I was absorbed in my own creative space, following my curiosity and working through problems as they presented themselves. Later I remember making a homemade flashlight with my Dad - I electrocuted myself by using too thin of a wire at first. I remember the grade school science lesson on [simple machines](https://i.ytimg.com/vi/fvOmaf2GfCY/maxresdefault.jpg) (inclined planes, levers, wedges… true classics of the genre) and how interesting to be able to break things down to their simplest parts and combine them in new way. 

So I’ve always been a builder, and tools have always fascinated me. As a two year old I couldn’t have told you why I was interested in tools, and as an adult it has still remained a largely unexamined inclination. But my drive to understand and use the tools around to me is a pretty deep one and recently I’ve been going back to try and understand - why?

One of my favorite books is [Cool Tools](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/18528382-cool-tools) by Kevin Kelly. It is a kind of grown up version of the picture encyclopedia that captured my attention as a kid. The book is subtitled, A Catalogue of Possibilities, and it is put together like a scrapbook with pictures, descriptions, and testimonials of the various tools it contains. It uses a pretty broad definition of a tool, and it encompasses everything from the best earplugs, razorblades, and screwdrivers that are commercially available, to books on design principles and budget travel. I’ve read through it at least 5-6 times now and whenever I pick it up and page through it I’m still transported to a state of creativity and possibility  - similar to how I felt as a kid playing with legos or looking at my picture encyclopedia. I’m absorbed by the possibilities that are available. What could I use that for? Would it be better than the way I do it now? Would it really work? What new problems does this tool create? 

So why tools? What makes them so interesting? From a certain perspective they are quite boring, just the mechanisms we use to accomplish our more interesting human goals. But they’ve never felt that way to me. And I realized the last time I was flipping through that book that our tools are how we overcome our human limitations  (or try to anyway). They are how we extend our otherwise very limited reach. And they are interesting because they work! They give us the ability to do things we otherwise could not do, and experience things that we otherwise wouldn’t be able to. I’ve always wanted to contribute to the project of extending our reach by developing and using the best tools that are available. 

Early in high school I remember learning that it was possible to program a calculator to solve the dreaded quadratic equation. It would be a few years until I learned how to do it myself, but I still remember that first experience of looking at the code I had copied from a friends TI-84 to my own (its not cheating… its open source lol) and trying to follow the logic of what it was doing. It totally changed my perception of the TI calculator owned and of what you could do with a computer. Previously I had thought of a computer as either quite trivial (basic arithmetic on a handheld calculator) or so complex as to appear magical (playing a video game). I understood on some level that both activities took place on a computer but I had no concept of how they were related. I remember realizing that the computer, if still almost entirely beyond my understanding, was a really powerful tool, and that the way to access that power was through code. 

And so today I see software as a really powerful set of tools that we as a society are in the early stages of learning how to use to continue the project of extending our reach. Networked computing devices are now widely available and this new tool appears to have some really profound implications for our society. Code is where the action is and as an engineer (a tool man?) I want to get in the game. 
